Your manager just dropped by your desk with one of those requests. I need you to figure out how we can use AI to improve our operations. No requirements, no success criteria, no budget, no answers to your follow-up questions, just figure it out. Or maybe it's we need to modernize. What does that even mean? Do we need to take a different approach? Are we doing complete overhaul? Who decides when it's modern enough? Sound familiar? These vague requests are completely ambiguous. And the ironic part is when you need to figure out what to do next, but you don't even know what figuring it out means. You can't just Google your way out of it. You won't get results for my boss just gave me a word salad and called it a project. I was a principal engineer at Amazon where I spent nearly 20 years. At Amazon, we were expected to deal with ambiguity on a daily basis. But the problem was that nobody taught us how to do it. To survive and thrive for as long as I did, I had to develop my own tools. In this video, I'll share three of them with you so you won't feel that anxiety whenever you find yourself in one of those situations where you don't know what to do next. My hope is that we can exchange that anxiety and transform it into confidence about how to proceed. If you like this type of content, hit the like button and subscribe. It helps me know that I'm creating content that's actually useful. If there are topics you want me to cover, leave a comment down below. And if you want more from me, subscribe to my free newsletter. Link is in the description. For my first point, you have to understand that what you're seeking when you're dealing with ambiguity is clarity. But not all clarity looks the same. Before you can find your way out of ambiguity, you need to understand what types of things clear things up for you. I learned this lesson the hard way early in my career at Amazon. My manager asked me to create a strategy for reducing customer service contacts. That was it. This was the entire directive. I spent the first two weeks in analysis paralysis. I pulled up customer service data. I read documentation. I sat in on meetings hoping that somebody would drop hints about how we could do all of this. I kept waiting for clarity to somehow emerge. like maybe I'd wake up one morning and suddenly understand what I was supposed to do. By week three, still nothing. I had copious notes, graphs, spreadsheets full of data, but no idea what to do with it all. By week four, my manager asked for an update. I mumbled something about, "I'm still gathering requirements and I'm analyzing the data." You could see the disappointment on his face. all of this time and effort and I had nothing to show for it. Here's what I was doing wrong. I was waiting for clarity to find me instead of thinking about what clarity would look like. And that's my first point. It starts with posing the question, what type of thing would cut through the ambiguity and working backward from that. Clarity isn't a feeling that things are no longer ambiguous. Sometimes clarity is a number or a simple answer. Like when you're told to improve performance, what you really need is webpage load times need to be under X seconds or we have an X budget for this quarter. Once you know you need to fill in that blank number, you can actually start figuring out what that number is. The task becomes how can I find that number? Which may still be ambiguous, but it's much more tractable than when you started. Sometimes what would give you clarity is a question or a problem statement. I once spent a bunch of time trying to improve customer retention until I realized what I needed was to question where exactly are we losing users. That question led me to the next step which was to update our metrics to capture where customers were leaving. Sometimes the answer is a whole problem space boundaries around what a team should and shouldn't focus on. Modernize our system becomes clear when you learn that it means update our payment processing system to handle international currencies, but don't touch the inventory system. Now you know where to put your energy. Sometimes what would give you clarity is a set of principles or tenets that when you applied them would help you develop a strategy or direction. Make our product more userfriendly becomes actionable when you establish principles like prioritize mobile users, reduce clicks to purchase, and never sacrifice security for convenience. These principles now act as the basis for decisions. The next step is determine how you can develop these principles. Maybe you need to write a document where you propose some tenants in a meeting, or maybe you need to get leaders into a room or sponsor a workshop. After that awkward check-in with my manager, I forced myself to stop and ask what type of thing would make my situation clear. I realized I needed two things. A specific target, that's a metric, and guiding principles for how to achieve that number. That's the strategy. I didn't know what those were going to be, but just understanding what type of thing would provide clarity gave me enough to formulate some next steps. If you're ever in a truly ambiguous situation, start with thinking about what type of thing would give you clarity. Here's a list of things that it could be. A specific target or metric. A question that frames the real problem. Boundaries that define a problem space. Principles or philosophy to guide a decision. Success criteria or the definition of done. Constraints that limit your options. Examples or reference points. Clarity on stakeholders and who has the right to make decisions or priorities and tradeoffs. Now, that's not a comprehensive list, but it's a good place to start. Whatever you do, don't just do a bunch of random research and wait for that feeling of ambiguity to wash away. It's not going to happen. You know what's interesting? When I was dealing with all of this uncertainty while on the job, I realized something. The fastest way to clarity would be getting guidance from somebody who's been there. That's exactly why I've partnered with today's video sponsor, Strawberry.me. Because here's the truth. Those vague requests from your boss, the uncertainty about what to do next, they can be opportunities to get noticed, but only if you handle them right. Strawberry connects you with professional career coaches who help you navigate exactly these situations. They work with you to develop strategies for turning confusion into career wins. Whether you're stuck with ambiguous projects, overlooked for promotions, or trying to figure out what your next move will be, they help you create a clear action plan. And unlike waiting for clarity to magically appear, which as we've established, doesn't just happen on its own, career coaching gives you the tools to take control immediately. Visit strawberry.me/ifeengineer to claim your $50 credit and get matched with a coach who understands where you are and what you're going through. That's strawberry.me/ifeengineered. Thanks again to Strawberry for sponsoring today's video. My second tool is perfect for when you're so lost you don't even know where to start. I knew that I needed a target metric that would lead to fewer customer service contacts, but I didn't know where to begin. There were so many things that we could choose. Average handle time, first contact resolution rate, contact deflection rate, self-service adoption, FAQ, page views, help content quality scores, agent productivity, customer satisfaction scores after contact. I didn't know where to begin. That's when I did a simple thing. I started to think about what metrics would not lead to fewer customer contacts. So, I made a different list. Reducing average handle time wouldn't help because customers would still contact us, just for shorter periods. Increasing agent productivity wouldn't help because we'd handle contacts faster, not prevent them. Improving customer satisfaction after contact wouldn't help because they're still contacting us. Any efficiency metric wouldn't help because that was all about handling contacts better, not having fewer of them. This inversion led me to the critical part. I'd been looking for metrics that assumed contacts already happened, but our goal was to prevent contacts entirely. So, I flipped my thinking. What metrics would imply customer service contacts were being prevented? contact rate per order, percentage of customers who never contacted us, time between purchase and first contact, self-service completion rate, and our root cause elimination rate. Now, I was finally getting somewhere. And it started by thinking about what would lead to the opposite of success. Then do the opposite of that list. The mathematician Carl Jacobe said, "Invert, always invert." Some attribute this to Einstein, but regardless of who said it, the applicability to problem solving is undeniable. And that's my second point. When you're stuck in ambiguity, invert the problem. We usually have no issues figuring out what won't work. Instead of asking what would lead to success, ask what would guarantee failure. Then do the opposite of that. My spin on this technique is called recursive inversion. You simply apply inversion on subpros until all that you're left with are items that you know how to do, which is the base case. Once I identified that contact rates per order was my northstar metric, I still faced ambiguity. How exactly were we supposed to reduce contact rates per order? So I recursed and inverted again. How would I definitely fail at reducing contact rates per order? Simple. We would never analyze why customer contacted us. make changes based solely on assumptions, focus on small edge cases instead of common issues, completely ignore the customer journey. We would fix symptoms instead of root causes, and we would skip measuring the impact of our changes. Inverting these gave me a clear approach. We should deep dive into categorization of contacts, base decisions on data, target high volume contact drivers, map our contacts to customer journey stages. We would address our root causes and we would measure everything. This type of thinking started giving me directions and structure. This was starting to turn into a clear course of action. Of course, dive deep into customer categorization was still ambiguous, but all I had to do was recurse again and invert. That's the magic of recursive inversion. You keep inverting until ambiguity transforms into a concrete to-do list that you know how to do. My third tool is inspired by the children's game 20 questions. If you've never played it, here's how it works. One person thinks of something. It could be anything and keeps it secret. Everyone else tries to guess what it is by asking yes or no questions. You only get 20 questions to narrow it down from literally anything in the universe to one specific thing. Suppose you and I are playing. Is it alive? No. Is it something that you'd find in a house? Yes. Is it bigger than a microwave? No. Do you use it everyday? Most people do. Yeah. Is it electronic? It could be. Is it used for communication? In a way, it is. Yeah. Is it a pen? Yes, it's a pen. A smart player eliminates massive possibilities with each question. Is it alive? Cuts the universe in half. In a house eliminates oceans, mountains, and stars. By question six, you're really zeroing in. The best questions are the ones that eliminate most of the options regardless of the answer. If you know data structures and algorithms, this is a lot like a binary search, which is an amazingly efficient way to find something. If you can pose a question that cuts the search space in half, or better yet, removes a dimension or degree of freedom. It doesn't take that many questions to zero in on what you need. And that's my third point. When you're stuck dealing with ambiguity, pose as many questions as you can and then go find the answers to those questions. The questions you can't find answers to frame your boundary of knowledge and help you understand the problem space. The questions you can find answers to help you make progress. In either case, it will lead to more and more refined questions. These questions represent a chain of thought. So I need both a metric and guiding principles for my work with reducing customer service contacts. I had my metrics from recursive inversion, contact rates per order, but I still needed those principles to shape the broader strategy. So I created a question spreadsheet and started filling it in with every question that popped into my head. What percentage of customers who contacted us once contacted us again? Answer: 65% never contacted us again after the first resolution. What was the contact rate for our competitors? Competitors didn't share those numbers. This defined a boundary. We'd have to set up our own benchmarks. What's the correlation between product price and contact rate? It took me a while to dig up the answer, but it turned out that higher price items had three times the contact rate. Do we want to eliminate all contacts or just the unnecessary contacts? This question sparked a debate. Some customer service contacts actually increase customer lifetime value. I put this in the lively team discussion and debate category. What happens to our customer satisfaction when we prevent contacts versus resolve them quickly? Answer. Prevented contacts led to 20% higher satisfaction scores. After about 20 questions and their answers or non-answers, patterns emerged that shaped the strategy. After presenting my questions and answers in a meeting, we landed on four tenants. Prevention over speed, self-service for simple, human touch for complex, proactive over reactive, and fix the root cause once. The reasons questions are so powerful is because they have built-in assumptions. When you pose a question, you're also bringing with it a context. If you're able to answer a question, not only are you honing in on what you need, but you're also really exploring a space. since the context further develops. This allows you to ask better and more refined questions. A series of questions is also really effective in documenting your train of thought. This is super useful when you need to do a write up on your work or develop a presentation. You can use the Socratic method to bring other people with you and fast forward them on what you've discovered. I developed a comprehensive strategy by using all three of the tools in this video. All of this was guided by thinking about what type of things would provide clarity, recursive inversion, and by using questions to explore a space, find answers, and asking more refined questions. If you found this video useful, none of it really matters unless you're seen as a high performer and high potential at work. Check out my video on the subject where I go into detail about how you can do just that without really doing more work than you already