Okay. Hello everyone. They say that when you give a talk on a conference like DevOps that well it's very important to engage a bit with the audience so that we get to know each other. And a way of doing this is by asking you guys a lot of questions. But given the thing that you are eating, I'm afraid that if you're going to put your hand up all the time, this is not going to end well. So I'm just going to ask one question. Did anyone attend this talk last year? Okay, a few people. So for the people that attended, well, I would like to start by offering you my apology because well, I can imagine that you think that you thought that I did a talk for you, but yeah, actually I did it for my kids. So I have two kids at home. This is them on the picture. age 10 and 12 and well the thing is they work as an IT architect but yeah they have no clue what my job is all about. So last year I had this great idea and I thought what if I do a talk on DevOps it's recorded and for those that watch the keynote afterwards you know parents try to limit the screen time of their children. So next time they ask screen time, I will just put up my YouTube recording and then finally it's some useful screen time and they will finally know what I do. It's what I did. And then a bit later, my daughter was at school and the teacher asked my daughter, "What does your father do? What's his job?" And she said, "Of course, well, he's an IT architect." But as you can imagine, the teacher also doesn't know what an IT architect is. So I was of course very convinced because of all the things that I did, the the DevOps talk, the YouTube recording and so on, that she was going to be able to explain all the hard and difficult things that I have to do on a day-to-day basis. And actually she did because she said he's just in calls all the time. But luckily I still have my colleagues because I'm joking a bit. But yeah, my colleagues, they do know how hard my job is. And I also would like to take this moment to thank them for the fact that that they support me in my job. And yeah, they support me a lot and they sent me like Slack messages with book suggestions that I should read on how I can really become a lot better in my job. For example, meeting driven development. Now, the thing is, of course, that I wouldn't be here if I didn't believe that there's more to the job of an architect than just being in meetings. And well, I would like to touch about on a few things that I didn't talk about last year. And to do this, I would like to go back all the way to the year 2012. And in 2012, there were some very important events in the world. For example, the world was going to end. We had the Maya apocalypse, the end of the Maya calendar. We were going to see the end of the world. But of course, luckily for us, it didn't happen. But we also had some nice things. I don't know if you still remember this song, Gangnam Style. Very nice dance. You might try it at home. Tried it at home. Now the thing is the reason why I still remember 2012 because at the time in 2012 I was working at a project for a customer and the project actually had a major problem and the problem of the project was this guy. The problem of the project was the IT architect. The guy was well he was a junior IT architect first time as an architect. He didn't really know what an architect was supposed to do, how to make decisions, how to lead the team. And yeah, I feel a bit sorry for the guy, but it certainly wasn't the best architect that I ever met. Now, the reason I know this for a fact is because this was the IT architect. It was me. So, I started at this job and I started a bit earlier in 2011. And somewhere along the way, the architect at the time left. I had nothing to do with it. And they asked me, do you want to become our new architect? And they said things to me like, you know, you will like it, right? You will get more responsibility. You get to make some decisions on how we're going to do stuff. You get to steer a bit the project in the direction that you want to. And well, you seem like the kind of guy that wants to have this responsibility. They were right. I did like a bit more responsibility but it was not the kind of responsibility that I understood I would get because all of a sudden I felt like I was now responsible for everything that went wrong. It's not what I wanted. So, ever since I've been spending a lot of time on reading and watching talks or sessions on how to be a good architect and as you can imagine there is a lot of stuff on this subject. And one day I stumbled upon this description. If you want to be a good architect, well then you have to be someone that messed up so many times that you just know what works and what doesn't. I can relate to this because I did mess up a lot of times. The only hard thing with this description is you can't really tell this to your customer or your business, right? If you're going to say, "I am the architect. I'm going to mess up stuff." Yeah, probably not the best thing to do. So, what could be a better definition of a good architect? We can find some inspiration in ancient Greek. So in ancient Greek the word architecton or well architect comes from the ancient Greek the word architecton and in ancient Greek architecton is a word composed out of two parts. We have the first part archie which means leader and the second part tecton which means craftsman. So this means that if you want to be a good architect well for sure you have to be both a leader and a craftsman. And it's based on these two parts of the word that we're going to zoom in a bit deeper on how what does it take to be a good architect. And let's start off with the right side just because we can. Now if you're a craftsman and if you need to build stuff then it also means that you need to make decisions on how you need to build stuff. You have to make technical decisions. But the thing you got to know is that we humans were actually not so good at making decisions. And there's a lot of research on this. For example, this is a well-known example out of the research. So in the research, they ask a question to people. And the question is you get two job offerings. You have the job offer on top where your wage decreases year after year. You start off at 60K in the first year, 50K in the second year, 40K in the third year. You also have a second job offer, the one on on the bottom. You start off at 35K in the first year, 45K in the second year, 55K in the third year. The question is which job offer would you take? Most people pick the second job offer. The first job off job offer, it feels a bit weird. your wage that decreases year after year. It does not feel like the right decision. But if you take a closer look, you would actually see that the first job offer is the better job offer because you will gain more wage at the end of the 3-year period. Here's another example. Imagine it's Friday evening. You're going to the movies and you leave your house with a movie ticket worth €20 and a bill worth €20 in your pocket. You arrive at the movies and you lost the movie ticket worth €20. The question in the research is would you spend your remaining €20 on buying a movie ticket? Most people say no. They already spent €20 on a ticket. They're not going to spend €20 again. Now, let's change a little thing in the scenario. Still the same Friday evening, we're leaving our house, but this time we leave with two bills of €20 in our pocket. We arrive at the movies and we lost one of the two bills. Same question, would you spend your remaining €20 on a ticket? Almost everyone says yes. They don't even understand why you're asking the question. They wanted to go to the movies. They lost €20. But what to do? What the fact? What the hell has to do with the fact that I wanted to go to the movies? I can see some people doubting a little bit on the front row about the decision that they would take. So, especially for you, I made a little schematic of the difference. In both cases, you leave your house with two pieces of paper, both worth €20. On the left side, it's a red and a blue paper. On the right side, it's two blue papers. You lose a paper along the way. On the left side, you lose a paper worth €20 with the red color. On the right side, you lose a paper, a blue paper also worth €20 with the blue color. You arrive at the movies, but you take a different decision. Now, the reason for this is because on the left side, you feel like you're spending €40 on going to the movies, while actually in both cases, you just lost something worth €20 of value. Now, why do we take these kind of decisions? There's a lot of research on this, and one of the the most influential books on this is a book thinking fast and slow. And in thinking fast or slow, they describe how our human mind works and well how we take decisions. And basically our human mind has two systems that it can use to make decisions. You have system one. And this is our fast and automatic and intuitive thinking. It's your gut feeling as you might like. But system one will not always lead us to the best decision. And system one is the thinking that was often used in the decisions that I showed earlier. We also have system two and system two is a logical and analytical mind and we can use it to override decisions taken by system one. But the problem or the thing with system two is that we need some time to activate it. It's a bit slow but then again the end result or the end decisions of decisions taken by system two should be better decisions. So knowing all this well how can we as architects or as IT people in general make better decisions for starters we have to know that system one will often lead us to a thing called confirmation bias and it's something that I experienced myself but also with colleagues in the past so for example imagine you're solving a certain problem and well you already solved a similar problem in the past Then often you will have a tendency to apply the same solution again because well it worked in the past why won't it work again and you will be looking for ways to confirm that this is actually the right solution but I said similar problem not necessarily the same problem so perhaps the same solution is also not the best solution actually we should be trying to do system two thinking and a way of doing system two thinking is by making it making it a habit of of uh when you're trying to solve a problem, always exploring at least a couple of options and do a proper trade-off analysis. It will take a bit more time, but in this case, you're triggering your analytical mind and the end result or the end decision on how to solve it should be better. Also, when you're building stuff, keep in mind that there is this thing called the para principle, universal principle. And the principle basically states that well with 20% of the effort you can already resolve 80% of the problem. But we it guys we like complexity and complexity is often in the edge cases. So often we have like this trap that we spend too much time and effort on the edge cases certainly in the beginning but actually we should first be focusing on the common case and well when we're making decisions you always read or hear that well you should only make decisions or you should postpone decisions until the last responsible moment. But the question of course is how can you find this last responsible moment or what is when is a good moment to make a decision. I myself I'm a a big fan of using this approach as an approach to making decisions in in a timely way. It's a approach called tracer bullets. It's already exists since a long time. But the idea is that well if you use the tracer bullet approach and if you need to solve a problem the idea is that you try to explore different parts of the problem as soon as possible so that you get a good view on the problem and that you can take better decisions. Now knowing all this how would this look like in practice? I um took a little example from a system I worked on already quite a while ago. Uh the system was a system system for the government and the goal of the system was to pay child benefits within the country. So child allowances for people that have children and well if you need to do this then of course you need to determine the monthly amount that the people or that the families with children will get at the end of each month according to a lot of legislation. You need of course also pay the money. You need to manage a lot of personal data on the families, the bank accounts, their relationships and so on. Manage depths for people that are in depth. Create, generate and send documents. Reporting accounting performance is important. Security, lots of integrations with external system to automate a lot of stuff and so on and so on. So quite a few things to think about. Now how do you start building such a system with all the things that I said earlier? Well at the start we said well let's first go to the core goal of the system and the core goal of the system well we need to be able to pay money at the end of each month. If you don't have this there is no business value our system will be worthless and then we can apply the tracer bullet. So it means if you need to build a system and we want to touch the different parts of the problem well then we need to touch at least these three parts and we can also apply the para principle and we can say okay let's build a system touching these three parts of the problem but just for the common families the common situation mother father one or two children let's already do this and if we build this we're spending not much effort because we're in the par principle but we have to take a lot of decisions and we're also validating all these these decisions very early on in the project and then we can go a step further and again touch another module again for these common families because we can already serve a large customer base we can now also do performance testing very valuable to validate a lot of the decisions that we made once we have this we can start of adding less common we can think of adding less common cases and so on and so on so this is a way to gradually build up your system taking a lot decisions along the way, validating them, but also because you're still early on in the project, you still have the room to correct those. And again, we can apply the same thing to all the other stuff. Now, decisions is not the only thing. Oh, sorry. Um, the key thing over here is this is all about de-risking early. What you want to do is get a good view on your problem, get a good view on the unknowns, and you want to get the risk out of your project. You want to chart the territory, get the risk out of your project as soon as possible. Now, the thing is that decisions is of course not the only thing. There are also some pitfalls that we have to take into account. And one of these pitfalls and I know we're a tech conference and it's perhaps not the best message to bring over here but is uh well we we in IT we suffer a bit from innovation addiction. We see all this new and shiny stuff in the tech industry and it's it comes at us every day and this is of course very tempting to apply all this on our day-to-day projects. But yeah, we should not always do this. We initi we also have this law for threeletter abbreviations and the guy that taught me this is sitting over here. Um so we like things like TDD, BDD or DDD but well some threeletter abbreviations we should not really love. For example FDD or fashiondriven development should not be our core goal. Our core goal should really be providing the best return on investment for our customer. Pick the technology or pick the solution that provides the return the best return on investment for your customer for your business within the given time and budget constraints. And the thing is this go both this goes both ways. Somewhere last year I wrote this blog post about a little joke that I like to make. So as an architect I often have uh people or customer or business coming to me and they have this problem and they ask hey Mr. architect, can you automate this? And I always say, yes, of course, we can do everything. We can even make your system bake French fries if you want to. But the real question is, is it worth the investment? Because if you ask me to automate something that takes like half a day a year, well, probably if that's just a manual manual work, then there is no return on investment in automating this. So challenging these kind of questions is also a part of our role. So far for the craftsman part the other part that I would like to talk talk about is uh the part of being a leader and well if you're an architect and if you're a leader then of course one of the things that you might think about leading is your team and well to start this part of the talk a little story from already a long long time ago. I think roughly 10 to 15 years. Uh so the situation was uh we had an application running into production and a couple of development teams supporting and extending the application running into production. Of course all of our development teams also had our local laptops, local workstations where we could run a local copy of the application with some test data. And then the thing that security people in general don't really like is we were also able to connect all of our workstations directly to the production database. And one day we had this really difficult hard to reproduce bug into production. And in one of the teams there was this junior developer very motivated committed guy. And well he really was committed and motivated to solve this hard and difficult bug. and he tried for a long time to reproduce the bug on his local machine with the test data, but it was impossible. But he got a great idea and he said, "Look, I'm just going to start an instance of the application on my local machine. I'm going to connect this straight to the production database." Yeah, let's be honest. What better way is than solving a production issue using real life production data, right? And the guy was very successful. So he managed to solve the bug and he was of course very happy, very proud and he said, "Oh, I really want to get this shipped. I really want to get the ship to production as soon as possible. I'm going to start a full build just to make sure that I didn't break anything, but he kind of forgot a little detail in the build. There was this plug-in configured that said, well, before we run the integration tests, let's first drop the database to make sure there are no leftovers from a previous run. and he dropped the production database. It was not his best day anymore. Now, here's another story couple of years later. So, in this case, well, we were building a system for the government and well, the thing was the system really had a really tight political deadline. there was no way in moving the deadline and well in order to reach the deadline one of the the elements was the fact that or one of the things that we wanted to do was we well we need to be able to scale up our development teams fast. So we started off with the one team, the one on the left and well I was one day pushing them a bit towards the fact that well we need to lay some groundwork some foundation so that we can have the other development teams start up as soon as possible. And one day I was pushing a bit too much and well one of the guys in the team he got a bit frustrated with me pushing and he was completely right about this and I will tell you why in a bit. Being a leader isn't always easy. It's often a very hard thing. And well, if you want to have some help or if you want to think about how can I be a good leader, then I really like this model. So this model is called the model situational leadership. And the model states that well as a leader you have two big dimensions that you can operate upon towards your teams, your team members in being a leader. You have the dimension of directive behavior that states well how directive are you towards your team member? Are you like highly military commander style directive or are you lowly directive? You also have the dimension of supportive behavior. So how supportive are you towards your team members? Do you offer them low support? Do you offer them high support? And based on this you get four quadrants. You have people like the junior in my first story that are very motivated to do stuff but yeah have almost no no experience. Well, in this case it's important that you give clear and specific instructions. For example, do not connect to the production database would have been a good instruction. But you will also have people in your teams that already have some experience but for some reason they lack a bit some confidence, some motivation. So in this case it means you also need to level up on the supportive side. So it means you need to go more into a coaching mode and you have to say things like here try this you can do this you've got this really level up on the supportive dimension. You also have people that already have a lot of experience in your team but for some reason they lack the confidence. So here you really need to empower them to try to take decisions themselves. So you really need to go into a supportive mode. Shift a bit the power towards them and give them a problem. Try to make them solve the problem but also say that you are there if they need you, if they need some feedback or some help. And then the last one is actually the situation for my second example. You will also have people in your teams of course that are very experienced and also very confident and very motivated. So in this case autonomy is really important. Instead of me saying we need to lay the foundations to make the other team start, I should have just said we need to find a way to make the other team start. That's the goal. And the foundation was just one way of reaching the goal. So here give them the goal but do not say how they should reach the goal. Give them autonomy. Now, if you're working as an architect, you're also often visible and you're also often visible in the organization that you work for. And then comes this nice thing, the thing that none of us likes, but then you're confronted with politics. So, one last story to kick off this part of the talk. A couple of years ago, I was at a customer and well the customer they had a mainframe application that was end of life and they wanted to replace this mainframe application with a new application and they asked us to make a proposal. So we made a proposal to replace this with like a modern new application and well we had to go over to the customer to explain our proposal. So this was like big meeting lots of important people from the customer CIO architects from the customer. We started explaining our proposal and somewhere during our explanation, one of the architects of the customer, he got really mad at us and he really looked like this guy. He was really red and well he said things to us like we really I really don't believe in your proposed solution. It's not going to work. Of course, we were a bit shocked, right? We didn't expect this. We spent a lot of time in this. But yeah, we said, okay, let's keep an open mind. please explain us why. And he said, well, it's simple. It's not going to work. It's not a good solution. Okay. Um, but yeah, we spent a lot of time and effort in this. A lot of smart people had to look at it. Of course, we might have missed something, but yeah, we need something more. Please explain us why. Well, it's simple. It just does not fit the requirements. Yeah. Okay. But we need a little more detail, right? or can we go over it? Can we go over it together, please? Yeah, help us out. I said, but I don't have time for that. Yeah, okay, but it's turning to be it's coming a bit of a difficult situation, right? So, give us something. What should we fix in the solution? Yeah, but you're asking me to fix it. You made the solution. You should fix it. And the guy stood up and he left the meeting. And we felt a bit lost of course. Now the thing is that the guy was actually very frustrated because he also tried to build this application a couple of years before but he failed and he burned a lot of money but we didn't know this when we went in. So actually he didn't trust us and he was really like we were like a threat to him and this is actually the reason why he was acting to us like this. So if you ever end up in these kind of situations or if you're ever in some of these yeah politics situations well I always think solving technical problems that's the easy thing people problems that's really the hardest part of our job but this might help you with at least reflecting on how you can deal with these kind of situations. So again a little model the model is called the agreement trust matrix from Peter block and the agreement trust matrix says that well if you meet people in an organization you can again place them on two dimensions. You have the dimension of trust. So trust says well the people that you meet do they have low trust in you or do they have high trust in you. You also have the dimension of agreement. The people that you meet, do they have a low tendency to agree with you or a high tendency to agree with you? And based on this four quadrants, you will meet people that have a high trust in you and a high tendency to agree with you. These are called your allies. And allies are very valuable people to meet in an organization because they will help you defend your ideas, help you defend wherever you want to go to. You will also meet people that have a high trust in you but do not necessarily agree with you. These are called your opponents. Also, opponents are very valuable people to meet in an organization because they will challenge your ideas and the end result will be better. So again, very very valuable people to have. On the low trust side, it's a bit of a different story. So on the low trust side, you will meet people that have no trust in you, but for some reason do agree with you. They're called your bad fellows, and I didn't invent the terms. Um, so bad fellows, these are people where you should be a bit careful because they agree with you, but the moment things go wrong, they will also say, "Hands off," and they will point to you and they will say, "Well, it's all your fault." And you will also meet adversaries. Adversaries are the people that have no trust in you and don't agree with you. Think of the guy that I just talked about earlier. Now the key trick over here is what you want to do is you want to turn bad fs and adversaries into allies or opponents. You want to make them valuable. So this means that you need to work on trust. And ways to work on trust is basically by just showing you are human. Talking to them at the coffee machine, talking about some personal stuff, what you did at the weekend. Try to build up a relationship. try to turn them into allies or opponents and try to make them valuable. Also, if you're working in an organization or at a customer, keep in mind that there is this thing called political capital. And political capital is defined as the accumulated goodwill, trust or influence that you have and that you can use to reach wherever you want to go to uh have decisions uh been taken in the way that you want them to be taken. And really think of this as some kind of bank account. If you start in an organization and you're new in the organization, you typically have little to no balance on your political capital bank account. Getting to know people, you're building up trust and you're building up balance on your political capital bank account. But whenever you end up in difficult situations, difficult discussions, or you need to force stuff, you're also withdrawing again from this political capital bank account. And of course what you don't want you don't want to go bankrupt. So this means if you want to influence in an organization you really have to keep the balance of your political capital bank account in mind. Now I started off with this description in the beginning of the talk. As an architect well you have to be someone that messed up so many times that you just know what works and what doesn't. I hope that by sharing some of the stuff over here that you will at least mess up a bit less than I did. So here are some key takeaways. When you need to make decisions on how to build stuff, try to apply the system to thinking. Try to make it a habit of always evaluating different options and their trade-offs and only then move forward. Avoid fashiondriven development and focus on providing the best return on investment for your customer. Lead your team with the situational mindset and keep in mind that trust gives you influence in an organization and mind the balance of your political capital bank account. And last but certainly not least, the most valuable weapon of an architect is still just your common sense. A lot of the things that I said are basically just common sense. So this will get you a long long way. Now in case you do mess up, here's also a little tip. The perfect architect is a little bit like the Loch Ness monster, rumored to exist, but never actually been seen. My name is Robin Kustus. I work as an architect. I was uh very happy to be here and I want to thank you all for being here in such a big uh number. If you like this kind of stuff, feel free to add a follow me on LinkedIn. So, a lot of the stuff that I talk about are also in LinkedIn articles that I wrote a lot more. Yeah, a bit more in depth explained. Um, and I'll all that's left to say is have a great DevOps. Thank you very much.