I will try to completely change the way you think during a chess game. So if you watch this entire video and you start using what I am about to teach you, you will see massive improvement in your chess. So I will be demonstrating this here. And what I am about to teach you is not an opening strategy but a middlegame strategy. Something that almost nobody talks about. a strategy that you can use after the opening no matter what opening you play. So to demonstrate this of course first of all I need to play an opening. So you can use this strategy with white or with black. It doesn't matter what opening you play. I will just try to demonstrate the most simple opening I can which is put a pawn in the center, protect it with a different pawn, develop the kingside pieces and then also castle the most basic opening I can and my opponent just castled. Okay, so I will be teaching you a two-part strategy. Part one of this strategy or biggest priority is blunder prevention. So, every time your opponent makes a move, you need to sit on your hands. You need to look why did they make this move? What are they trying to do? Well, they just castled. They just castled. We don't have to worry about anything here. We are not at risk of blundering anything. Okay. So, it's our turn to make a move. Whenever it's our turn to make a move, we are going to go through a four-step thinking system. We are going to use the CCTO thinking system which stands for checks, captures, threats, optimization. And you need to force yourself every single move. Yes, every move. If you skip this for one move, you will be in trouble. Every move you need to go through these steps. Do I have any checks? No. Do I have any captures? Yes. We could always blunder by capturing here and they would recapture. But we still need to look at it even if it's not a good move because this might give us inspiration for tactics in the future. So no checks or captures. Do we have any threats? A threat means attacking a high value piece with a lower value piece or attacking an unprotected piece or threatening a checkmate. We don't have any of that. So we need to optimize. Optimize means we want to get more pieces into the game and we also want to use our E pawn, D pawn and C pawn. These are the three most important pawns. So I will be playing pawn to C4. If you had played this move, this move, this move, this move, this move, all of that would be fine as well. Just optimize something. Don't obsess too much over finding the best move. You just need to optimize. Okay? And we will do this this entire game to basically drill your brain. So you can do this in your own game as well. So first set on your hands. Why did they play this move? Well, they attack the E4 square. They attack the pawn on C4. But it's not a problem. We are not in any danger. So we go to CCTO. No checks. We do have a capture. We do have a capture. We can play. If we play this capture, they are probably going to take back. Is that good for us or is that bad for us? I think it's a bit a bit equal. I probably would say it's good in the sense that we are exchanging one of our flank pawns, a pawn on the side of the board for a central pawn. So, I will be playing this move. Pawn takes and they take back. Okay. Sit on your hands. Does this cause us any problems? Of course not. Okay. Do we have any checks? No. captures. Wow, this still doesn't work. Okay, threats. Do we have any threats? Well, actually, we have a threat. Queen to C2 as a threat. We would be threatening to just win a pawn there. We would be winning this pawn on F5 potentially. So, that is what I am looking at here. This threat and very interesting, our opponent ignores it. They play knight to C6. So either they missed it and we are winning material here or we missed something and we will be in trouble. So we need to look at this. The first step of course before we even go into CCTO we need to avoid tunnel vision sit on your hands. Why did they do this? What is their plan? Maybe they didn't just blunder. Maybe they have a plan a plan of forking or queen and our bishop. So that's something that we need to look at. So if we take this pawn on F5, if we go tunnel vision and we just grab it thinking, okay, take and take, we are up a pawn. Yes, that would be right. But this is why we need to sit on our hands. What if they do play this move that we looked at? What if they do play knight B4? Wow, the queen's under attack and the queen cannot stay on these squares. So I have to go somewhere else. But the bishop the bishop would be lost. So we already basically avoided a huge blunder here by using sit on your hand. So you see how powerful this is. So what do we do? CCTO. No checks, no captures. But I think we have a threat. Playing A3 is actually a threat. It is a threat because we are taking away the B4 square from the knight which reactivates the threat of capturing on F5. Very important. All right. First, set on your hands. Why are they doing this? Well, they might try to do some checkmate attack. Okay. All right. I don't see an immediate problem. Um, next up, checks. No. Captures. Yes. Well, we can just capture this pawn. And maybe they capture back and then we capture this and this looks fine to me. I think I think we are just up a pawn. So I mean we are playing against the 2,300 but just by using this simple two-step strategy sit on your hands and use CCTO. You can see we are already doing quite great. I did know that the moment that I was going to take here, my queen would probably get attacked, but it's okay because we still have multiple squares we can go to. We just have to figure out what is the best square. So, we can go to G4. That's the square I had in mind. Like I can always go here. I think we can go to H3. We can go to H5. Which one is the best? Honestly, I'm not entirely sure. But I think G4 just looks safe, looks solid. It's also a bit aggressive because we are attacking in this position. We do want to watch out, of course, that our queen doesn't get trapped. So blender prevention will always be our number one priority. I can already see a future where black is going to play H5, attack my queen. That pawn is protected sideways. So then I would have to move my queen. I still have a square. I can go to H3. But we don't want to test our luck. We don't want this to stay that way for too long. Okay. So do we have any checks? Yes, but they don't work. Captures. Yes, but they don't work. Threats. Do we have any threats? While yes, we have a threat. If we play knight C3, we are just threatening to exchange, win a pawn, and also free our queen. So, this is the move I use. And literally, this simple thinking framework that I am teaching you right now is the exact framework I use to become more than 2,200 rating on chess.com. Literally, just forcing yourself to do this every single move. Don't skip a single move or you will mess up every single move. You need to do this. Okay, they attack. So, we need to move. We could go H3. We could go G3. Um, the question with G3 is that's proposing a queen trade. Do we want to trade queens? I have this rule that as soon as I am up two points of material, that could be two pawns or a piece or something like that, I have to exchange everything. Right now we are only up one pawn. So I don't think it's enough. I don't think we should start exchanging everything. So I will try to keep my queen alive. Keep my queen on the board. Okay. They play rook here. Set on your hands. Honestly, it's not doing anything. So we don't have to worry. All right. And it's just simply our turn again. Checks. No captures. No threats. I don't think so. So, we need to optimize. And optimize is the step where you need to try to save time. You don't want to overthink optimizing. You just want to do something which improves your position. So, I'm just going to play bishop here, which it connects my rooks, supports the pawn. It's okay. All right. So, they play rook here. We have to figure out what are they doing with this rook here. I don't know. I don't know. Maybe they want to start some pawn storm or something or or sack for the knight. I don't really see anything. So, we have no checks. We have a capture that doesn't work. Do we have a threat? Well, um this looks like a threat. This looks like a threat. However, they can just exchange and then it doesn't lead to anything. So, I won't be playing it. So, that means we optimize. What is the best optimization move? I don't know. I don't even care. I just have to do something that improves my position. And I was looking at the rook here because of course if we can use this pawn and try to open up the position, we can get the rook in here as an attacker. So sit on our hands. Why do they do this? They want to attack my bishop. Is that a problem? Not really. It's far in the future. We still have time. No checks, no captures. We have a threat. We attack the rook and they might exchange, but at least they are helping us get more pieces into the game. We already saw this move coming. It's really not a problem. We don't have to worry about this because we can always just either move the bishop or protect the bishop. Okay. Um I'm thinking what the best move would be. I think rook B1 protects the bishop, but it's also a little bit passive. We don't want to turn the rook into a babysitter that has to look at the bishop forever. So, it's probably best to just move the bishop and try to use it somewhere active instead of having it Yeah. being under attack. Um B5. Okay. I think I don't know. Maybe they just wanted to protect the knight. Yeah, I don't really see much else. Yeah, I think they just want to protect the knight. Okay, we still have no checks, no captures or threats. I think that really work. So, we need to optimize. Well, I do want to get this bishop out of the way so I can double my rooks. So, I need to go somewhere. I really don't have many squares, but I think we can go here. It's a good square. We are attacking into their position. And we always have this diagonal to retreat as well. Okay, they play rook here. Makes sense. They are trying to fight back against the open file. So, we are going to go for this, which is that we are going to double up on the open file, which is very nice. Okay, what's going on with queen F6? What's going on with queen F6? I think maybe a sacrifice, but probably not really. Or maybe they will play pawn here. Actually, they could play pawn here and then try to trap that bishop somehow. So, we need to be careful. All right, we have no checks. We have no captures that work. I think we have to look at them, but this gives away material. Um, and this also gives away material. We do get some pieces in exchange, but um, it's giving away material. Okay. So, we are going to have to look for threats. This is a threat. We are attacking the queen. The queen the highest value piece. So, for sure this is a a great threat. Okay. and they move it. Um, well, we do have a check right now. We have a check, but it doesn't work because the queen can take. Um, the captures, none of them work at the moment. Okay, so we need to look for more threats. While I'm looking if I can activate this knight. Uh, this looks good, but it's a mistake because they take the rook. Uh, this also looks interesting. We attack the queen. Um, they can take with the bishop, but we take that rook with a check. So, they cannot take with the bishop. And if they take with the rook, we take with the bishop. So, another good move, another threat. And it's actually not just a threat. It's a queen trap, I see. Because this queen has no squares. The knight attacks these, the bishop attacks these, and then the knight is also covering the rook, and the rook is covering the final orange square. So basically the queen is just completely trapped. It's completely trapped. So they have to take. And now of course we have a move that's both a check and a capture. We have to play that for sure. And now this should be easy to win. Probably everything wins. But there should be very easy. And I hope all of you watching can find the move here that we should play as white. Check capture threat. Well, we have a very simple threat. this. We just pin the queen to the king. That's okay. That's check. Um, they can actually not go to the back rank because then that would be a checkmate. So, they go here. So, I think we just need to try to checkmate them by using the queen here. Uh, we still have to look at what they are doing as well. They could potentially back rankmate us, but it's not going to happen in this position. So, we have nothing to worry about. And now this should be some easy checkmate. I'm not sure what the fastest way will be, but there has to be some checkmate here. H check. Maybe activate a pawn somewhere for a check. I actually think I will do this check with the pawn. And I'm trying to get them to trade. I'm trying to get them to trade because if they trade and they remove this rook, then it's very easy. We just have the queen. And then yeah, I think here we should be able to pick up all of the pawns. Yep, just pick up all of the pawns. Yep, more pawns. And we are perfectly fine. We could still blunder this. We could still blunder this if we um allow them to do a fork with the knight and if they get our queen for free. So that's something we need to be careful with, but I don't think it's going to happen. And then here I will um teach you my very favorite move in the endame. Queen takes C4. And not everybody likes this, but this is a good move because this is just a simple winning endgame. Like we have these two pawns. We can start pushing them and and their king has to well it has to try to stop them, but the king won't be able to stop it. If we push, they will be able to get closer, but if we connect them, their king can never do anything. And we can basically just walk over that side of the board. They can never take um they can never take because if they let me show you if they take this pawn this one is running and they can never catch up in time. So if you ever have a position like this just know that they cannot capture and then of course here it's very simple. We can use the king. We can go here. We can take the pawn and then we can promote. So you can see how simple it was to beat a 2,300 just using the strategy. So, please try it out in your own games as